# Git Files


# What is .gitignore file
* When working on a project with Git, there are often files or directories that you don't want to track, such as temporary files, compiled code, or sensitive data. To exclude these files from being committed to your repository, you can use a __.gitignore__ file.

* A __.gitignore__ file is a simple text file that contains a list of patterns for Git to ignore when it performs operations like staging, committing, or pushing. Git will not add files or directories that match these patterns to the repository, nor will it show them as untracked files when you run __git status__.

# basic .gitignore template
```gitignore
    # Ignore files generated by the IDE
    .idea/

    # Ignore compiled code
    *.class
    *.pyc

    # Ignore sensitive data
    secrets.txt

    # Ignore build output
    build/
    dist/
```
* Here, we are ignoring the __.idea__ directory, which is generated by some IDEs, as well as any compiled code files (__.class__ and __.pyc__), which are generated by some programming languages. We're also ignoring a file called __secrets.txt__, which contains sensitive data, and the __build/__ and __dist/__ directories, which contain build output.
  
* You can customize the .gitignore file to your specific project needs.

# Tips for creating an effective .gitignore file
* Be specific: Use exact filenames or directory names to exclude only what you want to exclude.
* Use wildcards: Use * to match any characters, and ? to match a single character. For example, *.log will ignore all files with the .log extension.
* Comment your patterns: Use # to add comments to your .gitignore file explaining why certain files or directories are being ignored.
* It's important to note that a .gitignore file only affects the local repository where it is located. If you have multiple developers working on the same project, each person should create their own .gitignore file with patterns specific to their local environment.

# What is Global .gitignore file
* You can also create a global .gitignore file that applies to all of your Git repositories. To do this, create a file called .gitignore_global in your home directory, and add patterns to it just like you would with a regular .gitignore file. Then, run the following command to tell Git to use the global .gitignore file:

```git
    git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore_global
```