# Git

## Table Of Contents

- [Further Reading]()
  - [Git Concepts I Wish I Knew Years Ago](https://dev.to/g_abud/advanced-git-reference-1o9j)
  - [Official git Documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/gittutorial)

# Introduction to Git

- **Git** tracks changes to source code. i.e., version control system. **GitHub** is a hosting service, a set of project management tools and a social network centered around coding.

# Git's Strong Points

1. Git is very Fast
2. Git is smart - even if you change the name of a file, or move it to another directory, Git will continue to track it.
3. Git is flexible and powerful - you can alomost do anything.
4. Git is safe once is backedup.

# Three States of Git

- A file can either be in one of the following states:
  1. **Committed** - the data is stored in stored in the local database.
  2. **Modified** - the file has been modified but it has not been committed to the database yet.
  3. **Staged** - the modified file is marked to be part of the next commit snapshot. All the changes are still local.

# Git Architecture

# Check Git Components

- Inside the project which contains a **Git** repository, we can check the **Git** components:
  ```git
      ls -F1 .git/
  ```
- **Output**:
  - COMMIT_EDITMSG
  - config
  - description
  - HEAD
  - hooks/
  - index
  - info/
  - logs/
  - objects/
  - packed-refs
  - refs/

# Git Files

## What is `.gitignore` file

- When working on a project with Git, there are often files or directories that you don't want to track, such as temporary files, compiled code, or sensitive data. To exclude these files from being committed to your repository, you can use a `.gitignore` file.

- A `.gitignore` file is a simple text file that contains a list of patterns for Git to ignore when it performs operations like staging, committing, or pushing. Git will not add files or directories that match these patterns to the repository, nor will it show them as untracked files when you run **git status**.

- Basic`.gitignore` template

  ```gitignore
      # Ignore files generated by the IDE
      .idea/

      # Ignore compiled code
      *.class
      *.pyc

      # Ignore sensitive data
      secrets.txt

      # Ignore build output
      build/
      dist/
  ```

- Here, we are ignoring the `.idea` directory, which is generated by some IDEs, as well as any compiled code files (`.class` and `.pyc`), which are generated by some programming languages. We're also ignoring a file called `secrets.txt`, which contains sensitive data, and the `build/` and `dist/` directories, which contain build output.
- You can customize the `.gitignore` file to your specific project needs.

- Tips for creating an effective `.gitignore` file

  - Be specific: Use exact filenames or directory names to exclude only what you want to exclude.
  - Use wildcards: Use _ to match any characters, and ? to match a single character. For example, _.log will ignore all files with the .log extension.
  - Comment your patterns: Use # to add comments to your .gitignore file explaining why certain files or directories are being ignored.
  - It's important to note that a .gitignore file only affects the local repository where it is located. If you have multiple developers working on the same project, each person should create their own .gitignore file with patterns specific to their local environment.

- What is Global `.gitignore` file

  - You can also create a global `.gitignore `file that applies to all of your Git repositories. To do this, create a file called `.gitignore_global` in your home directory, and add patterns to it just like you would with a regular .gitignore file. Then, run the following command to tell Git to use the global .gitignore file:

    ```git
        git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore_global
    ```
