# Angular: Getting Started
* this course covers:
1. how ti build components
2. how to create templates, data binding and directives
3. services and dependency injection
4. HTTP and observables
5. Navigation and routing
6. Angular CLI(Command Line Interface)

## Introduction
* Angular is a JS Framework for building client-side applications using HTML, CSS and JS.

### Why Angular?
1. Angular makes HTML more expressive.
2. Angular has powerful data binding 
3. Angular promotes modularity by design
4. Angular has a built-in support for Back-End integration

### Why a New Angular and not AngularJS?
1. Angular is built for speed: it has faster initial loads, faster change detection and improved rendering times.
2. Angular is modern and support latest JS features
3. Angular has simplified API.
4. Angular enhances our productivity to improve our day to day workflow

### An Atomy of Angular Application
* compried of a set of components and services that provides functionality across those components.

### What are Angular Components?
* each component is comprised of a 
    1. template which is the HTML for the UI fragment to finding a view for the application.
    2. code associated with a view: the class contains the properties or data elements available for use in the view and methods which performs actions for the views such as responding to a button click.
    3. metadata which provides additional information about the component to Angular. it is this metadata that identifies the class as a metadata component

### Angular Modules
* helps us organize our applications into cohesive blocks of functionality.
* every Angular application has atleast one Angular module called the Application Root Angular Module.
* an application can have any number of additional number of Angular Modules including Feature Modules that consolidates the components for a specific application feature.
