# Version Control

## Table Of Contents

- [Introduction to Version Control]()
- [Git]()
- [GitHub]()
- [Further Reading]()
  1. [GitHub Pages - Website for you and Your Projects](https://pages.github.com/)

# Introduction to Version Control

# Benefits of Version Control

1. Tracking Project's History. With >> git log, you are able to view the changes made at what point of the project.
2. Managing Multiple Versions of a Project
3. Sharing code amongst developers
4. Coordinating Teamwork

# Git Files

## What is `.gitignore` file

- When working on a project with Git, there are often files or directories that you don't want to track, such as temporary files, compiled code, or sensitive data. To exclude these files from being committed to your repository, you can use a `.gitignore` file.

- A `.gitignore` file is a simple text file that contains a list of patterns for Git to ignore when it performs operations like staging, committing, or pushing. Git will not add files or directories that match these patterns to the repository, nor will it show them as untracked files when you run **git status**.

- Basic`.gitignore` template

  ```gitignore
      # Ignore files generated by the IDE
      .idea/

      # Ignore compiled code
      *.class
      *.pyc

      # Ignore sensitive data
      secrets.txt

      # Ignore build output
      build/
      dist/
  ```

- Here, we are ignoring the `.idea` directory, which is generated by some IDEs, as well as any compiled code files (`.class` and `.pyc`), which are generated by some programming languages. We're also ignoring a file called `secrets.txt`, which contains sensitive data, and the `build/` and `dist/` directories, which contain build output.
- You can customize the `.gitignore` file to your specific project needs.

- Tips for creating an effective `.gitignore` file

  - Be specific: Use exact filenames or directory names to exclude only what you want to exclude.
  - Use wildcards: Use _ to match any characters, and ? to match a single character. For example, _.log will ignore all files with the .log extension.
  - Comment your patterns: Use # to add comments to your .gitignore file explaining why certain files or directories are being ignored.
  - It's important to note that a .gitignore file only affects the local repository where it is located. If you have multiple developers working on the same project, each person should create their own .gitignore file with patterns specific to their local environment.

- What is Global `.gitignore` file

  - You can also create a global `.gitignore `file that applies to all of your Git repositories. To do this, create a file called `.gitignore_global` in your home directory, and add patterns to it just like you would with a regular .gitignore file. Then, run the following command to tell Git to use the global .gitignore file:

    ```git
        git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore_global
    ```

# GitHub

## GitHub Concept 1: Gists

- A **Gist** is a simple way to share snippets and notes with others

## GitHub Concept 2: GitHub Wiki

- **Wiki** is a knowledge based site where people can collaborate on documentation and order content.
- **Wiki** can contain many pages and can be edited directly on GitHub or Offline.

## GitHub Concept 3: GitHub Pages

- **GitHub pages** are hosting sites which host static pages like personal websites, blog or company webpage. No server-side code.
- How to Create Your First GitHub Page

  - **Step 1**: Go to [GitHub]() and create a new public repository named `test-repo.github.io`
  - **Step 2**: On the terminal, clone the repository by running the following command:

    ```sh
        # clone the test-repo.github.io repo
        git clone https://github.com/username/test-repo.github.io
    ```

  - **Step 3**: On the terminal, enter the project folder and add `index.html` file:

    ```sh
        cd test-repo.github.io
        echo index.html
    ```

  - Edit the `index.html` file, add, commit and push the changes:

    ```sh
        git add index.html
        git commit -m"initial commit"
        git push -u origin main
    ```

  - And you are done.
