# ANGULAR - THE BIG PICTURE

## Outline:
1. what is Angualar?
2. what are its strengths?
3. what are its weaknesses?

## Course Content:
1. Benefits of Angular
2. Architecture
3. Various tools
4. tips, tricks and gotchas
5. present and future of angular

# 1. Introduction
## Course Respository
https://github.com/joeeames/PSAngularBigPictureCourse

## Angular, What and Why
* Angular is a tool to help you build interactive websites. i.e., Framework
* for now and most probably in future, Angular most popular competition is jQuery

## History of Angular
* Angular was invented by Misko Hevery - at the time, he was working at Google

## Building a Hello World App in Angular

## Versions of Angular

# 2. Benefits and Features of Angular 
* Angular is a great framework for building web applications

## universal benefits of Angular
* these are benefits that apply no matter what kind of application you are buiding and no matter what kind of development team or compnay you work at:

1. Reduction of cost: using a framework to build a web application over building everything yourself is simply going to reduce the amount of cost that it takes to build the application. that's going to be realized in developer time, and bug fixing, instability.

2. Angular is very Standards Compliance: stndard compliance means that your website is going to run in more browsers and be able to reach more users. this includes things like ES6 or better, modules, internationalization and accessibility

3. Angular is extremely performant: it's as fast or faster than any other frameworks.

4. Angular is open source

5. Angular is very Popular (popularity)

6. Documentation

## Subjective and Situational benefits of Angular
1. Angular is a Framework: i.e., it comes with pieces will need to build a website built right right into it. for example, Angular comes with a Router, http, forms handling library, rxjs which is a way to handle asynchronous data, e.t.c. these are benefits because you have to make less decisions .

2. Uniformity: a typical Angular application is going to look a lot more like another Angular application .

3. Angular is backed by Google.

4. Angular is written using TypeScript: TypeScipt is a superset of JavaScript that also add types to it.

# Basic Features of Angular
1. with Angular, you can easily build Progressive Web Apps:
* Progressive Web Apps are emerging standards that allow web applications to be installed like a mobile application, to have an icon on a phone and to open up on a phone, or even to be available offline.

2. Angular supports Lazy Loading 
* this allows you to reduce the size of the data that initially needs to be downloaded to the browser in order for the application to begin working. this can improve the perceived performance of your application. 

3. Angular has a Fully featured Forms Library 
* it' svery easy with Angular to write very complex data input forms and handles complex validation and other aspects of forms.

4. Angular is built on top of RxJS Library
* the RxJS Library is a very modern library used to handle asynchronous data. from the developer's standpoint, this can ease the amount of time it takes to make asychronous features work in an application 

5. Angular has a fully featured Router.

6. Angular has a very robust, fully featured Animation Library
* this allows you to use animations when you are transition from one page to another, when  you sort list of data, when you add items to a list of data, or remove items from a list of data.

## Advanced Features 
1. Angular supports server-side rendering 
* server-side rendering is the process of rendering your first page view on the server. so the server creates the HTML and CSS and sends it to the browser instead of asking your friend framework to do that. this makes the initial page view much faster and more parsable by search engines.

2. Angular is very Mobile Friendly.

3. Angular Language Service 
* this is a service that you can use in order to get better intellisense and debugging in templates.

4. ngUpgrade Library 
* this library allows you to take existing AngularJS application and slowly migrate it to Angular, running both farmeworks side by side in the same web application, and as you have available resources, you can rewrite pieces of your AngularJS application into Angular, practically, a file at a time, while never interrupting the service of your application and almost never having to support two copies of the same code. 



# 4. Angular Architecture 

## 4.1 One Way Data Flow
* one wat data flow is an architectural construct that has come in JavaScript world in force recently.
* it's really about change detection.
* with this system, some kind of change happens to the state of component 

## 4.2 Dependency Injection
* dependency injection is one of the cornerstone of the both the AngularJS and Angular.
* it will be familiar to server-side developers who use strongly-typed langauges like C# or Java. these languages have long utilized dependency injection and Angular uses a similar architecture 

## 4.3 Components
* we look at how components work in Angular
* Custom Component sare another staple of modern JavaScript frameworks. AngularJS had them and Angular is the same

## 4.4 Directives
* directives are a way to add new capabilities to an element of your display

## 4.5 Templates
* Templates in Angular specify how components display 

## 4.6 Zone.js and Change Detection
* one thing you want for a good framework is for it to rerender the display when its state changes.
* state change doesn't just happen spontaneously. state changes when something happens in an appication.
* Zone.js is the key to change detection: it creates a wrapper around all asynchronous operations in the browser such as user interactions, HTTP, Timers, and any other events that can cause changes in state.
* Zone knows when any of these operations completes.

## 4.7 Rendering Targets
* with web frameworks we always assume that all we will use them for is to create a typical website and, as usual, we will be rendering on the browser, we send code, templates and data to the browser, and then the framework takes all that, puts it together, and renders it.
* but with the rise of mobile and other need,s it could bacame advantageous to create the same experience on a phone. we could also take advantage of rendering on a server for both speed and SEO, and there's even reasons to create things such as native desktop apps and other rendering targets. most modern frameworks today allow you to not only use your code in a browser, but in other places as well. Angular is no different.
* Angular's built to allow itself to be rendered to any number of devices by changing the rendering engine.
* Angular comes with two packages that are used by default to enable rendering to the browser and the DOM. these are the:
            1. Browser-platform library
            2. browser-platform-dynamic library
        * thy allow just-in-time compilation and precompilation for browsers
        * but Angular supports many different rendering targets currently and may support even more in the future.
    * Rendring Targets:
        1. Browser/DOM
        2. Server-Side Rendering with Angular Universal
        3. Native Mobile Apps 
        4. Native Desktop Aps 


# 5. Tooling
* one of the greatest benefits of Angular is the number of tools that are available to add even more features to your applications and ease your development

## 5.1 The Angiluar CLI
### Running a JavaScript Application
    1. Module Handling
    2. Bundling
    3. Minifying
    4. Typescript/ES6 Transpilation
    5. Browser Shims 
    6. Zone.js

### CLI Capabilities
    1. New Application
    2. New Component/Service/Pipe/Etc
    3. Serving up the application
    4. Linting
    5. Testing
    6. Building your code for production

## 5.2 Server-side Rendering
* Server-side rendering in Angular happens through a tool called Angular Universal.
### Main Benefits of Server-side Rendering with Angular
1. Performance
* this happens for two reasons:
** server-side rendering reduces the initial download size.
* a server-side rendered page isn't necessary smaller than a clint-side rendered one, but since you just need the HTML, CSS, and basic JavaScript for the one page's functionality that your user's going to see, you can actually save a lot of download space by avoiding downloading all of the code for your framework and all of the code and templates for further views in your application.
* server-side rendering also reduces the render time 

2. Search Engine Optimization

### Server-side Rendering Operations Modes
1. Full Pre-Render
* which involves running a development time process that will take your site and create HTML for each of the views. then you take that HTML, load it into a CDN, and when people hit your site, they get fast, quick initial responses. then afterwards, Universal will make the switch on the client side to a regular Angular App.

2. Dynamic Pre-Render
* in this case, whenever a request is received by your web server, the requested page is built by Angiluar Universal, and the rendered HTML and CSS is sent down to the browser, and then the switch happens.
** currently, only Node and ASP.NET Core are supported in this mode.

** with either method, once the browser has the pre-rendered HTML, Universal kicks in, downloads your full Angular App including the Angular framework. then in a hidden Div, it boots the app, renders the current page, replays any events that the user has done so far to the page to maintain the current state, and then swaps the display inside of this hidden Div to the main page whereupon the browser is now just executing a regular old Angular application.

** in either mode, you can get a working website up and running for your user without first having to download not only your Angular code but the Angular framework itself.

## 5.3 Mobile and Native Frameworks
### Tools for the Mobile App
    1. Ionic
    2. NativeScript

### Desktops
    1. Electron

## 5.4 Testing Tools
### Angular Testing Tools
    1. Karma
    * this a unit testing tool

    2 protractor
    * is a web automation testing tool used for running end-to-end tests

    3. other alternatives:
        3.1 Jest
        3.2 theIntern
        3.3 Cypres.io

### Angular Testing Utilities
    1. TestBed
    * this is helpful when you want to test components with their templates

    2. Asynch and fakeAsync utilities
    * these utilities take advantage of Zone.js to allow you to run async code as if it were synchronous 

    3. MockBackend
    * can help you when testing components or services which make HTTP calls 

## 5.5 AOT Compiler
* Angular's ahead of time compiler is one of the key innovations in the Angular framework.
* it radically improves the prrformance of Angular applications 