# Git and GitHub

## Table Of Contents

# Introduction to Git

- **Git** tracks changes to source code. i.e., version control system. **GitHub** is a hosting service, a set of project management tools and a social network centered around coding.
- **Git's Strong Points**

  1. Git is very Fast
  2. Git is smart - even if you change the name of a file, or move it to another directory, Git will continue to track it.
  3. Git is flexible and powerful - you can alomost do anything.
  4. Git is safe once is backedup.

- **Three States of Git**: A file can either be in one of the following states:
  1. **Committed** - the data is stored in stored in the local database.
  2. **Modified** - the file has been modified but it has not been committed to the database yet.
  3. **Staged** - the modified file is marked to be part of the next commit snapshot. All the changes are still local.

# Git Architecture

# Check Git Components

- Inside the project which contains a **Git** repository, we can check the **Git** components:
  ```git
      ls -F1 .git/
  ```
- **Output**:
  - COMMIT_EDITMSG
  - config
  - description
  - HEAD
  - hooks/
  - index
  - info/
  - logs/
  - objects/
  - packed-refs
  - refs/

# Git Files

1. Git File 1: `.gitignore`

   - When working on a project with Git, there are often files or directories that you don't want to track, such as temporary files, compiled code, or sensitive data. To exclude these files from being committed to your repository, you can use a `.gitignore` file.

   - A `.gitignore` file is a simple text file that contains a list of patterns for Git to ignore when it performs operations like staging, committing, or pushing. Git will not add files or directories that match these patterns to the repository, nor will it show them as untracked files when you run **git status**.

   - Basic`.gitignore` template

     ```gitignore
         # Ignore files generated by the IDE
         .idea/

         # Ignore compiled code
         *.class
         *.pyc

         # Ignore sensitive data
         secrets.txt

         # Ignore build output
         build/
         dist/
     ```

   - Here, we are ignoring the `.idea` directory, which is generated by some IDEs, as well as any compiled code files (`.class` and `.pyc`), which are generated by some programming languages. We're also ignoring a file called `secrets.txt`, which contains sensitive data, and the `build/` and `dist/` directories, which contain build output.
   - You can customize the `.gitignore` file to your specific project needs.

   - Tips for creating an effective `.gitignore` file

     - Be specific: Use exact filenames or directory names to exclude only what you want to exclude.
     - Use wildcards: Use _ to match any characters, and ? to match a single character. For example, _.log will ignore all files with the .log extension.
     - Comment your patterns: Use # to add comments to your .gitignore file explaining why certain files or directories are being ignored.
     - It's important to note that a .gitignore file only affects the local repository where it is located. If you have multiple developers working on the same project, each person should create their own .gitignore file with patterns specific to their local environment.

   - What is Global `.gitignore` file

     - You can also create a global `.gitignore `file that applies to all of your Git repositories. To do this, create a file called `.gitignore_global` in your home directory, and add patterns to it just like you would with a regular .gitignore file. Then, run the following command to tell Git to use the global .gitignore file:

       ```git
           git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore_global
       ```

# Setup Git

## 1. Install Git On Ubuntu

- Prerequisites:

  1. You will need an Ubuntu server with a non-root superuser account.

- Steps:

  1. Step 1: Installing Git with Default Packages
     - Git is likely already installed in your Ubuntu server. You can confirm this is the case on your server with the following command:
       ```sh
        git --version
       ```

  - If you did not get output of a Git version number, you will need to install it with the Ubuntu default package manager **APT**.
  - First, use the apt package management tools to update your local package index.
    ```sh
      sudo apt update
    ```
  - With the update complete, you can install Git:
    ```sh
      sudo apt install git
    ```
  - You can confirm that you have installed Git correctly by running the following command and checking that you receive relevant output.
    ```sh
      git --version
    ```

- **Setting Up Git**:

  - Configuration can be achieved by using the `git config` command. Specifically, we need to provide our name and email address because Git embeds this information into each commit we do. We can go ahead and add this information by:

    ```sh
      git config --global user.name "Your Name"
      git config --global user.email "youremail@domain.com"
    ```

  - We can display all of the configuration items that have been set by:

    ```sh
      git config --list
    ```

  - The information you enter is stored in your Git configuration file, which you can optionally edit by hand with a text editor of your choice like this (we’ll use nano):
    ```sh
      nano ~/.gitconfig
    ```

# GitHub

- **GitHub** is a web-based hosting service for **Git**. Main **Features** include:

  - code
  - Pull Requests
  - Issues
  - CI/CD - continuos build and continuos deployed features

- **GitHub Concepts**:

  1. **Repository**:

     - are the building blocks of **GitHub** and can be seen as a folder for your project. We can either create a repository on GitHub and clone it to the local machine or create a reposiory on the local machine, initialize it and push it to remotely.
     - **Features of Repository** include:
       - Assign Topics to Repository
       - Work with **Projects**
       - See and Manage Issues
       - Pull Requests
       - Insights - information about project.
       - Settings to the Repository

  2. **GitHub Files**: Special files in GitHub include:
     1. **README Files**: This is a special file known to **GitHub** and is automatically rendered on the landing page. It is typically written in **Markdown**(.md)
     2. **Licence**: Contains your open source licence allowing a spying contributor to know what is the upright licence for the project.
     3. **Contributing and Contributors**: Contain list of people/organizations who have contributed to the project.
     4. **Change log**: Contains a list of all major changes between versions of the project.
     5. **Support**: Exists to inform people about possible ways to get help with the project.
     6. **Code - of -Conduct**: Contains guidelines for people on the rules that have to obey when interacting with the project
     7. **Code Owners**: Used to specify which users are responsible for the code in a respository

3. **Gist**:

   - A **Gist** is a simple way to share snippets and notes with others

4. **Wiki**:

   - **Wiki** is a knowledge based site where people can collaborate on documentation and order content.
   - **Wiki** can contain many pages and can be edited directly on GitHub or Offline.

5. **GitHub Pages**:

   - **GitHub pages** are hosting sites which host static pages like personal websites, blog or company webpage. No server-side code.
   - How to Create Your First GitHub Page

     - **Step 1**: Go to [GitHub]() and create a new public repository named `test-repo.github.io`
     - **Step 2**: On the terminal, clone the repository by running the following command:

       ```sh
           # clone the test-repo.github.io repo
           git clone https://github.com/username/test-repo.github.io
       ```

     - **Step 3**: On the terminal, enter the project folder and add `index.html` file:

       ```sh
           cd test-repo.github.io
           echo index.html
       ```

     - Edit the `index.html` file, add, commit and push the changes:

       ```sh
           git add index.html
           git commit -m"initial commit"
           git push -u origin main
       ```

# Resources and Further Reading

1. [Digital Ocean - How To Install Git on Ubuntu](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-git-on-ubuntu#installing-git-from-source)
